The DISLEX software package
===========================

This directory contains the training and testing code and data for the
DISLEX model of the lexicon. The software consists of three main
components: (1) the C code for the simulation management, networks, and
graphics, (2) the input data files, and (3) example simulation
specification and output files.  The input data and simulation files are
provided for both the DISCERN orthographic lexicon and the smaller but
more complete DISLEX example with phonological maps as well. This file
contains an overview of all of these.  For more detailed explanations,
see the comments in the individual files themselves.


Code
----
defs.h
Definitions of the global data types and constants. The network weights
and activities and the input data are stored in fixed-size tables whose
max dimensions are hardcoded as compiler constants. If you design your own
data and accidentally exceed the max table sizes DISLEX should be able to
catch it and give a warning (and you can then change the table limits in
this file to fit your data).

prototypes.h
Prototype definitions for global functions.

globals.c
The global variables including network dimensions, weights, and activities,
input data, file names, simulation parameters and major graphics structures
are defined here.

gwin.c, Gwin.h, GwinP.h
Defines a simple window widget for graphics output.

main.c
Initialization of the X interface, networks, and input data. The main
training and testing loops. The input word pairs are given as text;
However, when the input is read in, it is converted into index
representation where every word is represented by an index to a table of
representations.

nets.c
Simulation code for the feature maps and associative connections:
presenting to the map, associative propagation, map self-organization,
Hebbian learning of associative connections, input and target
initialization, weight initialization.

stats.c
Performance statistics initialization, collecting, and printing routines.

graph.c
X window graphics: initialization, event handling loop, callbacks for
simulation control buttons, colormap allocation, displaying network
activities and weights, handling mouse events, resizing.


Input data files
----------------

Input data is provided for two experiments: (1) the DISCERN lexicon,
which contains orthographic and semantic maps only and has a large
vocabulary (see "Subsymbolic NLP" book Ch.10 for details), and (2) the
DISLEX model, which contains both orthographic and phonological maps,
smaller vocabulary, and ambiguous mappings between symbols and concepts
(see the Brain and Languge paper for details). The DISLEX model actually
consists of two separate simulations: in DISLEX-1, the orthographic map
and associative connections were self-organized together with the
semantic map, and in DISLEX-2, the phonological map and associative
connections with the same semantic map.

discern-lreps, discern-sreps
The lexical and semantic word representations for the DISCERN system.
These files have otherwise the same content as lreps and sreps in the
DISCERN package, but the script representations ($restaurant, $fast-food...)
have been removed from discern-sreps.

discern-input-pairs
The mappings between lexical and semantic words in the DISCERN
vocabulary. In this particular data, there are no ambiguities, and the
symbols map concepts one-to-one. This data was used to develop the
lexicon for DISCERN.

dislex-sreps
The semantic word representations for the DISLEX model, developed by
FGREPNET in the case-role assignment task based on the McClelland and
Kawamoto data (from the "Parallel Distributed Processing", McClelland
and Rumelhart (eds) book, MIT Press 1986): the words that were used in
identical ways in the original data (like MAN, WOMAN, BOY, GIRL) were
replaced with a single word (human) in the training sentences for
FGREPNET.

dislex1-lreps, dislex2-lreps
The orthographic and phonological representations of the DISLEX model.
The orthographic representations were constructed based on the Geneva
font, like in DISCERN. The phonological representations were formed
based on the IPA representations of the phonemes.

dislex1-input-pairs, dislex2-input-pairs
The mappings between orthographic symbols and semantic words, and
between phonological symbols and semantic words.  These mappings contain
several ambiguities, such as CHICKEN -> food, prey and human -> MAN,
WOMAN, BOY, GIRL. The data was derived from the McClelland and Kawamoto
PDP article by making the ambiguities explicit.


Simulation files
----------------
In addition to the application defaults file, two sets of files are
provided: those for DISCERN and those for DISLEX.

Dislex.ad
This is the X application default file. It defines a number of
parameters for the X display such as the graphics dimensions, colors and
fonts. This file should be placed in the app-defaults directory or
user's home directory (in which case it should be renamed "Dislex") or
included in the user's .Xdefaults file.

discern-simu
The simulation specification file for forming the DISCERN lexicon. The
simulation parameters are defined here and the results (snapshots of the
feature map and associative weights) are stored in the end. The file
specifies e.g. what lexical and semantic representation file and what
inputfile to use, how large the maps are, which modules to train and how
long, when to save snapshots, and what learning rates and neighborhood
sizes to use.  Each snapshot is stored at the end of the simufile, and
consists of the snapshot epoch, current error for each network (and
direction), and the current weights for both maps and associative
connections.  The idea is that the simufile is a complete record of one
training session. The resulting network can then be tested in different
ways without having to edit the simulation file. In this example, only
one snapshot was saved at the end of the simulation.  You can delete the
snapshot and change the parameters to specify your own experiments.

discern-output-test
The output of "dislex -test -npropunits 4 discern-simu", it shows the
performance statistics of the DISCERN lexicon. Note that for DISCERN,
4-unit propagation neighborhoods are specified.

dislex1-simu, dislex2-simu
The simulation specification files for the DISLEX model: dislex1 is for
the orthographic simulation, and dislex2 for the phonological. These
files have the same information as discern-simu, but specify different
representation files and inputfiles, and thereby result in different
models (however, the semantic map is the same in both, together forming
the full DISLEX model). The files only contain the last snapshot which
you can delete and modify to form the specifications for your own
model. (Note that if you rerun the experiments, you may not get an
exactly identical snapshot, because it was created with a different
random number generator, but your results should be very similar.)

dislex1-output-test, dislex2-output test
The output of "dislex -test dislex1-simu" and "dislex -test
dislex2-simu", these files show the performance statistics of the DISLEX
model. Because this data shows many ambiguities, the statistics are not
as meaningful as the graphics display.
